AIM:-
Attempt to make collective effort of people and institutions for translating the pending dream of Mahatma Gandhi “Gram Swaraj” into reality, not only on paper only but really in Gram Panchayat/s.
Objectives:- 
Organize courses on spiritual science and meditation to let the people Arise! Awake! and Stop not till the goal of soul is reached.
Adopt village/s to conduct evaluation study, impact study, Participatory Action Research (PAR) and Participatory Action studies (PAS) on various schemes, projects and campaigns of the Govt., Banks, Corporate and Non Govt. Organizations. 
Guide students for conducting participatory action research in adopted villages to evolve and demonstrate appropriate practices of agriculture and allied sciences that may sustain environment and provide higher income to people.
Evolve and promote best practices of organizing community for Gram Sabha to make appropriate plan for their betterment and conduct social audit of the developmental interventions made by the Govt. Banks, Corporate, and NGOs in the villages of their Panchayat.
Organize courses for youth on appropriate process of participatory planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of rural development interventions and certify them as Change Agent (CA). 
Facilitate CAs to work with Govt. department/agencies, organization, for integrated development of people and research institutions for promotion of appropriate practices of agriculture and animal husbandry to regenerate village eco system.
Create opportunities for professionals, individuals and institutions to let them utilize their potential optimally for modifying process of planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating village level interventions. 
Promote and present electronic documentation of community welfare and village development activities in website of Gram Panchayat to let the stakeholders monitor progress of their project/schemes/plans more easily and take action within time for ensuring greater success.
Promote institution of women, farmers and youth to take initiatives for establishing production, processing and marketing centers for an increase in income of rural poor and betterment of environment
Establish Appropriate Ashram to demonstrate process of empowering members of Gram Sabha to let them make collective attempt through Gram Panchayat for addressing local specific issue/s in collaborative manner. 
Develop and demonstrate Appropriate Aaganbaries (Kindergarten) for better grooming of rural poor children.
Develop documentary, publish newsletter, paper, magazine and books on process of development with achievement and activities of AIRD.
Establish partnership with the Government, national and international Universities, Colleges, Schools, Banks, Corporate, NGOs, CBOs, Research and Development Organization, Institutions, Foundations and Funding Organization and provide them platform for working with the community in village/s of India.
Take land on lease, donation and fee from individuals and/or organizations to demonstrate appropriate farming system in agriculture and animal husbandry, establish nursery, agriculture inputs production unit, schools, hospitals, education center etc. in rural India.
	Receive funds, grants, donations, membership fee and loan from individual, NGOs, CBOs, Bank, the Government, University, students, institutions, organization, Corporate and national and international funding organizations and utilese for achieving the objectives mentioned above. 