
Fact of life
This is a fact that we are two in one i.e. a combination of a body and a soul. Body is the creation of the parent and the soul is gifted by an invisible power. The soul comes from an invisible zone and goes back to the same zone by an invisible vehicle called a Development Car (DC). The DC has an invisible driver also. The almighty provides a DC with a driver to every soul to visit the earth planet through a body but for a certain period only.
A soul arrived on earth may return immediately after entrance in a body, which is developing in a water bag. It may also leave the earth before birth or at the time of delivery. Even after safe delivery of a body it is not sure how long he/she will survive.
Abortion, early death, immature death/s has been experienced by many people. But there is no example on earth of a person who was born but not died. It is true that there is no one on earth who has grandparents of his/her grandparents. It has also been experienced that some people cry for death but the soul does not leave his/her body. Timely and painless death of a body is the biggest gift to a soul visiting earth.
The manner and time of departure of the soul is not known to anyone but departure of every arrival is sure. In DC driver always remains ready to make return journey of soul. We need to maintain our DC for journey of our soul from visible zone to invisible zone.
Our work on the earth planet is directly related with the fitness of DC and the health of driver. The thought behind our action is being recorded in the invisible zone and evaluated automatically. When we earn blessings from the heart of a person the DC becomes more powerful and the driver with better health. But the earning curse damages DC and makes the drives unhealthy.
After completing granted period, when soul leaves our body for journey to the invisible zone, if the DC is not fit or the driver is sick the return journey becomes difficult. Therefore, we should earn blessings, not curse to enjoy both the visible and invisible zone. We know that a parent produces a physical body. Universal power blesses a soul to make the body functional. A body may work till the presence of soul in it. Soul has no name. A body with a soul has a name. Without a soul everybody is a dead body.
The soul rotates in three zones. In the first zone the soul is invisible but in the second and the third zone it’s presence may be experienced.  The third zone is the world of water. Life on earth starts from a “Water bag”. The almighty provides a soul to everybody with the surety of getting living necessities in a water bag itself and also in the second world till soul lives in a body.  A mother provides food and drink through a navel card to a body developing in the third world. The second zone is the world of air where people grow living materials for self consumption and also for the body developing in the third world.
The first world is the world of ether which provides rain, sun, gas etc to let the people grow living materials and save life in the second and third world. A soul visits the earth planet through a body to let it play a certain role and go back at a certain time as the role is over. According to Swami Vivekananda and the theory of quantum “life is a bundle of thoughts” as the thoughts end we become free from the cycle of birth and death.
Improve your thoughts to work for attaining salvation “Moksha”