History of rural development in India:-
Before India's independence, many rural development schemes were implemented by individuals, private agencies, and the government: 
Department of Agriculture: Established in June 1871, and agricultural departments were established in most provinces by 1882 
Institute of Agricultural Research: Established in 1905 at Pusa in Bihar to promote new cultivation methods 
Sriniketan Experiment: Started in 1914 by Rabindra Nath Tagore in Bengal 
Marthandam Project: Started in 1921 by Dr. Spencer Hatch under the YMCA 
Gurgaon Experiment: Started in 1928 by F.L. Brayne in Haryana 
Indian Village Service (IVS): Started in 1945 by A.T. Mosher and B.N. Gupta in Lucknow and Etawah, Uttar Pradesh 
Action taken for development after independence:-
Immediately after Independence four important components of land reform were thought of as major policy interventions in building the land policy. These included: (1) the abolition of intermediaries ; (2) tenancy reforms; (3) fixing ceilings on land holdings; and (4) consolidation of landholdings. 
 Sarvoday Programme: Started in 1948-49 by Vinoba Bhave in Bombay province 
Etawah Pilot Project: Started in 1948 by Albert Mayer, which was a forerunner to Community Development Projects 
The Community Projects Administration was set up in 1952 to administer community development programs.  
Since India’s independence, the country’s financial sector has seen significant changes.
In 1969 Indira Gandhi took a crucial step by nationalisation of 14 banks to meet the growing demand for bank nationalisation.  The nationalisation of banks resulted in centralisation of banking services, which promoted uniformity. Nationalised Banking services meant that there would not be a monopoly in this sector. Along with these benefits, nationalisation made credit accessible for all, not just the privileged section of society. Lack of sufficient credit and inefficient banking sector operation were the reasons for this step. As a result, banks can run more efficiently, and the public’s trust in them has grown. Several Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs) and Banking Financial Institutions (BFIs) have also emerged in this industry.
‘Privy Purse’ was a reward or payment made to the royal families of princely states that were forced to join independent India in 1947. In 1971 Indira Gandhi argued for its elimination to promote equal rights for all citizens and lower the government’s revenue deficit. As a result ‘Privy Purse,’ were abolished. It was a significant setback for the Indian royalty, who now had to pay taxes and were no longer exempted from the law.
The Department of Rural Development was established in 1974 as part of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture.
In 1978-79 the Government created Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP) by combining the Community Area Development Programme (CADP), Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP), Small Farmer Development Agency (SFDA), and Marginal Farmers and Agricultural Labourers Agency (MFALA) and implemented it in 1980.
The Ministry of Rural Reconstruction was established in India on August 18, 1979, and renamed the Ministry of Rural Development on January 23, 1982. 
On July 12, 1982 the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) was established. It was created by transferring the agricultural credit functions of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the refinancing functions of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (ARDC). The Prime Minister Indira Gandhi dedicated NABARD to the nation on November 5, 1982.
NABARD provides financial and non-financial interventions to help build the nation. NABARD promotes financial inclusion, rural entrepreneurship, and sustainable agriculture. NABARD provides banking services, credit, and insurance products to underserved rural communities.
In 1991, the Licence Raj was stopped, and private businesses could be set up easily. Dr Manmohan Singh, the then-Finance Minister, was instrumental in ending the Licence Raj in India.
After the crisis of 1991, Economic Reforms were introduced to improve the country’s situation. The New Economic Policy of 1991 has three essential components: liberalisation, privatisation, and globalisation, also known as LPG. Since the liberalisation process began, the Indian marketplace has opened up to both private and public sector enterprises. The private sector was encouraged to grow, and only 8 industries were restricted to the public sector in 1991. This growth of the private sector is known as privatisation. Slowly, the country began to carry out enterprises with foreign organisations. A change popularly called globalisation.
In 1991 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) began when the government introduced the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA). The government's economic reforms at the time opened up the economy and eased the conditions for foreign firms to enter the country. 
On 24th April 1993 amendment in constitution was made to empower community for governing local resource and services delivery system for justified equal benefits to all. 
Top bottom approach of rural development changed into bottom to top.  
In 1999 group approach of community development was also adopted by the Government by introducing Swarna Jayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY). 
In September 2000, leaders of 189 countries gathered at the United Nations headquarters and signed the historic Millennium Declaration, in which they committed to achieving a set of eight measurable goals by 2015.
In 2005 Right to Information was provided to all the individuals and institutions. 
On 2nd Feb 2006 NREGA provided opportunity to enhance the livelihood security of rural households across the country by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to every rural household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
The act encourages a sense of community and collective responsibility by strengthening Panchayat Raj institutions. It promotes a bottom-up approach in planning and execution, empower local communities to take charge of their development. The NREGA is a commitment to transparency and accountability, ensuring that funds are utilized efficiently and beneficiaries' rights are upheld through mechanisms such as social audits, grievance redressal, and proactive public disclosure.
2nd Feb 2009 Right to education
On October 2, 2009 the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) became the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). The name change was made to honor Mahatma Gandhi's contributions to rural development.  
In June 2011 the SGSY was a restructured by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) of the Government of India. National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) was established.
Implementation of NRLM was started on April 1, 2013 in phases. To identify poorest of poor families and organize their women into a self help group. 
All the members of SHGs are provided opportunity for formulating a Micro Investment Plan (MIP) of their families to enhance livelihood, meet social responsibly and become debt free from money lenders. 
The National Food Security Act (NFSA) of 2013 is a law in India that aims to provide affordable food to citizens. 
On May 24, 2014 the National Institute for Transforming India (NITI) Aayog was established to fulfill the Need for Economic Reforms by replacing the long-standing Planning Commission.  The NITI Aayog is the Indian government’s top policy think-tank, offering directional and policy suggestions.
In 2015 to create a more fair, just, and equitable world ensuring no one is left behind all member states of the United Nations adopted the SDGs that provide a shared blueprint for a more peaceful, prosperous, and sustainable future for all.
In 2015 Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act was introduced to bring income and assets held outside the country back into the country. 
On January 16, 2016, the Government announced the introduction of the government’s ‘Start-Up India’ scheme to increase employment and income development in the country.
The NRLM was renamed as the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana - National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) on March 29, 2016. 
On July 1st 2017 the Government finally put Goods and Services Tax (GST) into effect to remove the application of taxes at every stage of supply for transforming the Indirect Taxation in the country involving both the Central and State levies.
On November 8th 2017, the Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced demonetisation of all Rs. 500 and Rs. 1,000 banknotes to reduce the use of black money, increase cash in the banking system, stop the handling of fake currency, reduce all possible finances for terrorists. 
The Gram Panchayat Development Plan (GPDP) is a decentralized planning process that involves Gram Panchayats, elected representatives, and citizens to create a plan for economic development and social justice. The GPDP was first prepared as part of the People's Plan Campaign, which ran from October 2, 2018 to December 31, 2018. The government has decided to launch “Sabki Yojana Sabka Vikas” from September 2019. It aims to draw up GPDPs and place them on a website where anyone can see the status of the various government’s flagship schemes.
The GPDP is intended to reflect the community's needs, priorities, and development and social issues. The GPDP planning process is based on a participatory process and involves collaboration with the concerned Line Departments of the State and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
Action required to speed up rural development ?